Welcome!
Usually, our December program
features the Gilead graduation program
held in September of each year.
However, the 149th class of Gilead
was scheduled to arrive in the United States
when the COVID-19 pandemic was underway.
Therefore, that class was postponed.
So this month, we’ll focus on being
the best Bible teachers we can be!
Here are a few highlights:
Cecilio and Schera made many sacrifices
to help their students become
dedicated worshippers of Jehovah.
We’ll see the impact
they had on Mercedes and Abel.
The arrival of a baby brings
great joy as well as new challenges.
We’ll learn how Jehovah helps
first-time parents adjust
to their new responsibilities.
And we’ll learn how Louise Blanton’s parents
prepared her for a satisfying life
in Jehovah’s service.
This is JW Broadcasting®
for December 2020!
My comments this month
are drawn from 1 Corinthians 3:10:
“Let each one keep watching
how he is building.”
Building
—are we talking
about the upcoming construction
of a facility for headquarters departments
in Ramapo, New York?
Or are we referring to the building
of new Kingdom Halls in your country?
Well, as important
as those building projects are,
my comments are directed
to an even more important building work.
Let’s look at the context
at 1 Corinthians 3:5.
Apollos and Paul are mentioned by name.
And what was their specific role
identified to be?
Verse 5 says
“ministers through whom you
became believers.”
Apollos and Paul had taught
the Scriptures to many in Corinth.
In verses 6 through 9,
Paul likens this teaching activity
to the planting of a field.
Seeds of truth are planted
in the heart of a person.
By means of return visits and Bible studies,
the seeds are watered.
But if the person is receptive,
then with Jehovah’s spirit and blessing,
the truth will blossom
and grow to the point of dedication
and baptism.
Did you notice in verse 9
that Bible teachers are described
as “God’s fellow workers”?
What an awesome privilege we have
to assist Jehovah
in gathering “the precious things
of all the nations”!
So we now know the topic of these verses
in 1 Corinthians chapter 3.
It’s discussing Bible teachers
who help others to become believers.
But did you also notice that in verse 9,
Paul changes illustrations?
He said:
“You are God’s field under cultivation”
—that’s agricultural.
But then he changes the analogy,
saying “God’s building”
—that’s architectural; that’s construction.
Why the change in illustrations?
The building analogy
highlights a specific point.
You see, the illustration of the farmer
doesn’t focus on the farmer’s impact
on the growth of a plant.
In that illustration,
the farmer waters the seedling,
but it’s God that makes the plant grow.
However, the illustration of building,
or construction,
focuses on the builder’s involvement,
or the Bible teacher’s involvement.
The one constructing a building
has considerable influence
over the quality of the end product.
What kind of materials does he select?
Is he thorough in his work,
or does he cut corners
to get the job done faster
or with less effort?
Now let’s read the 10th verse
of 1 Corinthians chapter 3:
“According to the undeserved kindness of God
that was given to me,
“I laid a foundation
as a skilled master builder,
“but someone else is building on it.
“But let each one keep watching
how he is building on it.”
There in Corinth,
Paul, as a “master builder,”
had initially acquainted many with the truth.
In effect, he “laid a foundation”
for others to build on.
But what was that foundation?
Verse 11 says:
“For no one can lay any other foundation
“than what is laid,
which is Jesus Christ.”
Paul had helped establish
the congregation there in Corinth
based on the teachings of Jesus,
the foundation of the truth.
Building on that foundation,
others would become Bible teachers
and help still others
to progress toward baptism.
That is why Paul cautioned in verse 10
to “keep watching how” we build.
We can affect the outcome.
So to all of us Bible teachers,
including parents,
we ask the question,
How are we building on the foundation?
Why does it really matter?
Let’s read verses 12 and 13:
“Now if anyone builds on the foundation
“gold, silver, precious stones,
“wood, hay, or straw,
“each one’s work
will be shown for what it is,
“for the day will show it up,
“because it will be revealed
by means of fire,
“and the fire itself will prove
what sort of work each one has built.”
Do we understand how important it is
to analyze our teaching techniques?
Will we use the best techniques possible
to reach our student’s or our child’s heart?
Or do we just try to get by
with the bare essentials,
in effect, a halfhearted effort,
using hay or straw, as it were?
Some years ago in one developing country
during an economic boom,
it became a priority
to build more and more schools.
Unfortunately, building requirements
and materials
were substandard.
Well, what happened
when a 7.9-magnitude earthquake
hit one of the areas?
Many schools in the earthquake zone crumbled
while buildings around them
remained standing.
An official report indicated
that over 5,000 students died.
Think about it.
Prior to the earthquake,
schools were in session
and everything seemed fine.
Students and faculty
were coming and going on a daily basis.
But the unforeseen earthquake proved
that the building methods used
were not of the quality needed
to prevent collapse
and terrible carnage.
First Corinthians 3:13 makes clear
that how we build spiritually
when teaching Bible students
or our children
is just as important.
Now notice the sobering point
made in verses 14 and 15:
“If anyone’s work
that he has built on it remains,
“he will receive a reward;
“if anyone’s work is burned up,
he will suffer loss,
“but he himself will be saved;
yet, if so, it will be as through fire.”
The point in verse 14 is
that if we’re conscientious
and reach the hearts of our Bible students,
that may be what gives them
the needed fortitude
to withstand unexpected trials.
In that case, our diligent work “remains.”
Then verse 15 makes the point
that if our teaching techniques
were inconsistent
or were in some way slipshod,
our student
may not successfully weather a “fire,”
or stormy trial in his life.
We personally may survive,
but we might suffer the loss
of the one we studied with,
whether a Bible student
or our own child.
That’s why Paul is highlighting the need
to be the best Bible teacher
we personally can be.
However, we should mention
that if a person who progresses
to dedication and baptism
later leaves the truth,
it’s not necessarily the responsibility
of the Bible teacher.
The teacher may have been very diligent
and used
the best of spiritual building materials.
But the student or child
may not have responded from his heart.
Or possibly he allowed
human imperfection or temptation
to cause him to deviate from the way.
But the takeaway point
from 1 Corinthians chapter 3
is to do our best
to build in our students or children
fire-resistant materials.
We want them to remain
—to endure the tests
that are sure to come their way.
What might be likened
to building with inferior materials
when studying the Bible with someone?
Possibly, we initially
aroused a person’s interest
by telling him about the hope
of everlasting life in Paradise.
That’s indeed Scriptural.
But is that in itself building in such a way
that the person will survive
a fiery trial of faith in the future?
What if our teaching
consisted solely of saying,
“If you want to live forever in Paradise,
“you must study, go to the meetings,
and share in the preaching work”?
If so, we are not building
in a way to ensure
that the student or child
will resist the fire of trials
or stand the test of time.
In effect, we’re using wood, hay, or straw.
Do you remember that Paul said
we are to build “on the foundation”?
He said the foundation “is Jesus Christ.”
That is solid.
Ephesians 3:16, 17
help us to understand what it means
to build with quality materials
such as gold, silver, and precious stones.
In verse 16, it makes clear
that there’s a way
that we can “be made mighty
in the [person we] are inside.”
Let’s read verse 17:
“And that through your faith
“you may have the Christ
dwell in your hearts with love.
May you be rooted and established
on the foundation.”
How can we help our child or Bible student
become strong, or mighty, spiritually?
Interestingly, verse 17 said
that it’s by having
“the Christ dwell in your hearts,”
not just knowing Jesus in the head
but sounding
his teachings and personality down
into our student’s heart.
It means to know Jesus so well
that it’s as if he lives, or dwells,
inside of us
and motivates us as Christians.
The result?
Verse 17 concluded by saying
that the student would become
“rooted and established on the foundation.”
Yes, solidly grounded
on Jesus Christ.
And Hebrews 1:3
says that
“[Jesus] is the reflection of God’s glory
and the exact representation
of his very being.”
Jesus himself said:
“No one comes to the Father
except through me.”
So building with fire-resistant materials
means
helping the student to love Jesus, yes,
but also to have a close, loving relationship
with Jehovah God himself.
But why are we considering the theme
‘Keep Watching How You Are Building’ now?
Why is this more urgent than ever before?
It’s because all indications,
Scripturally and circumstantially,
point to Satan’s evil system of things
coming to an abrupt end.
The physical indications
of Matthew chapter 24
and the bizarre temperament described
at 2 Timothy 3:1-5
become more and more precise
as we watch “the scene of this world” unfold.
We can expect
even more opposition and persecution
from those who are opposed to our resolve
to stand on the side of Jehovah.
Our brothers in Russia and other lands
are experiencing this now.
Some have been beaten
and brutalized in other ways.
As we’ve heard,
others have been sentenced
to years in prison.
In recent years, the organization
has reminded us of what we can expect
as the great tribulation begins.
Do you remember this video clip
from the Pursue What Builds Loyalty
video series
shown at the 2016 regional convention?
Be reminded.
And your faith has led you here
as loyal servants of Jehovah,
confident that Psalm 97:10
applies to you personally:
“[Jehovah] is guarding
the lives of his loyal ones.”
Where are they?
Try the basement!
Check that door!
That video series
has been affectionately called
the basement video.
It was depicting one possible scenario
that could be considered a “fire”
according to 1 Corinthians 3:13.
The serious question
we want to ask ourselves is,
‘Would my Bible student or child
be in the basement with those other
faithful brothers and sisters?’
If not, would the reason be
because of his own lack of faith?
Or might it, at least in part, be
because we did not take
our responsibility as a teacher
seriously enough?
Did we build with fire-resistant materials
or, in effect, with hay or straw?
The same verse said:
“For the day will show it up . . .
“the fire itself will prove
what sort of work each one has built.”
It’s a sobering thought, isn’t it?
If you recall in the May 2020
JW Broadcasting® monthly program,
Brother Lett addressed the concern
a few parents have expressed
about some of our videos that depict
Biblical or modern-day situations.
In these, at times,
true worshippers are depicted
as having their faith tested
as if by fire.
The concern expressed is that some scenes
could have an effect on children
who’ve been protected
from all negative circumstances on TV,
including daily news reports of catastrophes
being faced by real people.
The basement scene we just reviewed
was one of our videos
that produced such a reaction.
Another one was the reenactment
of the Bible account
depicting Jehovah’s saving acts
in the time of King Hezekiah.
It was shown at the 2016 regional convention,
and the video is entitled
“O Jehovah, . . . I Trust in You.”
Let’s look again
at that portrayal of Jehovah’s saving acts.
My lord!
If a parent has shielded his child
from viewing all scenes on the news
or other visual images
depicting negative realities,
it’s understandable
that there may be a concern.
However, as Brother Lett stated:
‘Parents need to give their children
a realistic idea
‘of what we will face in the near future.
‘Many parents choose to help
their children appreciate
‘the graphic visual imagery
of a Bible-based account
‘while at the same time
building trust in Jehovah,
who will be with them in times of distress.’
The point is, friends,
the Bible warns us, young and old alike,
that a time of fiery testing
looms on the horizon.
We want to be realistic
and face these events
with faith and courage.
Our videos depict such circumstances
in a tasteful and sanitized way,
not showing any actual acts of bloodshed
or violence.
Be assured that the Governing Body
is not trying to scare anyone.
Instead, we are trying
to prepare everyone.
We feel responsible
to fortify the brotherhood
by using fire-resistant building materials
in the spirit of 1 Corinthians chapter 3.
As teachers of the Word of God,
may we all give prayerful thought
to the methods,
techniques, and the diligence we display
when conducting Bible studies.
We’re motivated
by the very spirit of Jehovah God.
The words at 2 Peter 3:9 come to mind.
Of Jehovah, it says:
“He does not desire anyone to be destroyed
but desires all to attain to repentance.”
May that be our resolve
as we take to heart
the inspired words of 1 Corinthians 3:10:
“Let each one keep watching
how he is building”!
Having children
is one of the greatest joys in life
and one of the greatest responsibilities
Jehovah entrusts to a husband and wife.
In the following dramatization,
notice how the arrival
of a baby changes a marriage
and how Jehovah helps first-time parents.
Jehovah has been so good to us.
We enjoy a busy life full of blessings . . .
. . . including one we didn’t expect.
We love our little Emma so much!
But child-rearing was harder than we thought.
Most days went well
—others, not so much.
I just need some rest.
When will things be back to normal?
I wake with every little cry!
I wake when she’s silent.
Am I doing this right?
I should check on them.
Any time to ourselves was time to do nothing.
Fatigue was affecting
our relationship with Jehovah . . .
. . . and each other.
We were so relieved
when David, a father himself,
offered to visit with another elder.
We read Isaiah 40:29:
“He gives power to the tired one
and full might to those lacking strength.”
As a loving Father,
Jehovah wants parents to succeed.
So he gives us
what we need to recharge us.
Things might never be like they were before.
But his suggestions helped us create
a practical and consistent spiritual routine.
David said it’s normal
for new parents to feel anxious,
and anxiety is tiring.
So we pray for a calm heart . . .
. . . and extra kindness when tired,
so we can keep working as a team.
I so appreciate Zack’s help.
And I’m sacrificing some unnecessary things
to put spiritual things first.
There will always be a lot to do.
But when Emma sleeps,
I feed my faith
and rest.
Our new spiritual routine is invigorating.
Hey, Daddy!
Look!
Hey.
Jehovah helped us to understand.
While life in this system
may have many challenges,
putting spiritual things first
will give us the strength to meet them.
That new father wanted life
to get “back to normal.”
But all parents realize
that having children creates a “new normal.”
If you are first-time parents,
please remember,
one of the most important adjustments
you’ll make
is to establish a new spiritual routine
for yourselves
and your precious little child.
Of course, children grow,
and when they cross into their teenage years,
suddenly, everything seems to change.
In the following video,
notice how Rudy and Nenita Garcia
were determined to teach
their daughters Jehovah’s ways
and the results they experienced.
We already had our firstborn, Renita.
And then I was told
that we were going to have twins.
We were new in the truth and inexperienced.
So I was saying to myself:
‘How can I take care of my children,
not only physically but more so spiritually?
‘How will I be able
to teach them to love Jehovah,
to worship Jehovah?’
And 1 Corinthians 3:10
shows us the importance
of raising a family
by using good quality materials.
So having a spiritual routine
is very important for the children.
My wife and I would have to lay
a good spiritual foundation.
We would have to set
a good example for our children.
As long as I could remember,
I would always see my parents studying,
doing personal Bible study.
I remember Dad—one time,
he came to us in the living room,
and he said, “You know,
I was reading Psalm 1:2,
“where it said we should find
‘delight in the law of Jehovah
and read in an undertone day and night.’”
He said, “What if we do this
as a family project,
like, we read the Bible every day
out loud together?”
And my parents were very simple, you know.
They didn’t require a lot of fancy things.
They were content.
Mom and Dad always worked part-time.
Dad pioneered, so money was limited.
Sometimes the car we had
wasn’t the most reliable,
and it would break down
right before the meeting.
I remember when our car broke down.
Initially I thought,
‘Oh, we’re not going to go to the meeting.’
Mom and Dad would say:
“Well, the car broke down.
There’s a meeting tonight, so let’s walk.”
So there are the five of us
—my dad in his suit,
the four women would be
in our dresses with our book bags.
And so that taught me not to let obstacles
and anxieties prevent me
from going to my meetings.
Spending quality time
was very important to my parents,
especially after the meetings.
We would change
into our pajamas, grab a snack,
go to the living room, and just start talking
about how our day went
and how the meeting went.
Just those special moments
—they brought us closer together.
I saw that Dad,
no matter how busy he was,
would drop what he was doing
and look at me and talk.
I knew I was more important
to him than what he was doing.
I remember a time
when I had a crush on a boy.
My parents reasoned with me.
I felt very comfortable,
you know, after that point, to maybe talk
about other things
because I could see that my parents
were not going to be angry at me.
You know, they were going
to listen to me and what I was feeling.
One of the blessings
that Mom and Dad gave me
was teaching me how to think
and meditate on scriptures.
They encouraged us to set full-time service,
or pioneering, as a goal.
We all worked part-time, me and my siblings.
And I remember one close family friend
said to me: “You know,
your parents are getting older.
“You know, you’re their daughter,
and you should probably work full-time.
That way they’d have more of an easy life.”
After that sister’s conversation,
I almost gave up
on pioneering, but I knew deep down
that my parents
would not be happy about that.
They wanted us to spend
our youth serving Jehovah.
My husband and I were invited to attend
the 145th class of Gilead,
and that was like a dream come true.
I have to thank my parents for that
because they always
supported me through the years.
I couldn’t have done it without them,
and for that I’ll be forever grateful.
I really do thank my parents
for the upbringing that they gave me.
I have a very happy life.
I’m thankful that I was able
to avoid a lot of heartache,
and that’s because my parents raised me
in the truth and in Jehovah’s way.
Children are born imitators,
and they’re going to imitate our example.
I want to thank Jehovah
for what our family is now.
To see all of us in the pioneer work
—all five of us are pioneering—
thank you, Jehovah.
Raising three daughters
took years of work and sacrifice.
But Rudy and Nenita are joyful,
knowing their daughters
are happily serving Jehovah full-time.
Likewise, if we build in our children
fire-resistant materials,
then we give them everything they need
to make wise decisions themselves.
This was the case for Louise Blanton.
Notice how her parents’ building techniques
helped her to choose a fulfilling life.
My family started studying
with Witnesses in New Jersey.
My parents had been very diligent
in helping us to appreciate
not only Bible principles
but also characters in the Bible
who could be a role model for us.
It helped us to know that Jehovah cared
not only for adult publishers
but also for the children
that were serving him.
When you went out in the ministry,
it became such a common thing
—the police would come and pick you up.
If they couldn’t track down the parents,
they would put the children in jail,
knowing that eventually the parents
would have to come looking for them.
The police would use scare tactics.
They’d say: “There are rats in the cell.
Is that where you want to be?”
—anything to make you fearful,
to intimidate you to tell them
where your parents were.
They’d put us in the jail,
and in order to build our faith,
we would sing.
We didn’t have Kingdom melodies back then,
so we used to make up songs,
and that would keep us focused
on what we were doing there.
After I reached the age of 18,
my parents were agreeable
to my accepting an assignment.
And in those years,
because of the racial issue in the south,
there were so many areas in the south
where they didn’t have Kingdom Halls
that the colored could attend.
So if you were free
and you would accept an assignment,
the Society usually sent you to the south.
My parents were both born in the south,
so they were able to tell us what to expect
to keep the culture shock
from being so great.
I was assigned to pioneer
in Andalusia, Alabama.
Based on all of the matters that pertain
to integration and segregation,
this was a hotbed
for testing those issues.
And so I was concerned
about whether I had the fiber
to work under those circumstances.
The field was wide open.
There were so many in the area
that had no knowledge of Jehovah’s Witnesses
and were very receptive to the message.
That part of our ministry was very rewarding.
We had some very strong
and helpful brothers
that Jehovah was using
to get his people
—no matter what color—
to appreciate Him and his purpose.
When you focused on these things
—the suggestions and the ideas—
the brothers would help you to appreciate
how to deal with the issues.
They taught us, for one thing,
that the whole purpose of the Ku Klux Klan
is to intimidate.
They feel that if they frighten you enough,
you will leave.
Satan has always used
methods to try to intimidate.
But we would make it a practice to stay,
to hold our place.
When we were in street work,
we’d stay right there.
And of course, as they passed,
they had their remarks to make,
but we just stood there.
When I think back on my youth,
there isn’t anything that I was able
to participate in
that I came to regret.
There were always blessings
that went along with it.
If you make yourself available,
Jehovah will use you.
Jehovah is always there as a support.
There isn’t anything
that he directs his organization to do
that doesn’t receive his support.
So if we are challenged with a new assignment
or if we feel inadequate about it,
if we look to Jehovah
—with Jehovah, you can’t fail.
Louise’s parents
taught her to appreciate principles
and characters in the Bible.
That reached her heart
and aided Louise to endure difficult trials.
She has now spent over 50 years
of her life in the full-time service,
including over 40 years in Bethel service.
Hard work and sacrifice
may also be needed to help our Bible students
to become disciples.
We’ll see that in our next video.
A teacher should always help
his or her student
to develop love for Jehovah.
That’s the best foundation to build on.
For me, it’s important that they see Jehovah
as a real Person.
In order to help them build
a good foundation, they need to know
that Jehovah gave us the Bible
so that we can receive his guidance
for the future and for eternity.
I’m so thankful for my Bible teacher.
She always helped me see
Jehovah’s point of view
on things from the Bible.
I’ll never stop thanking Jehovah
for what he’s done for me.
He drew me to the truth.
He gave me a teacher
that didn’t just teach me about the Bible,
but by his example, the brother taught me
how to really be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
When I started studying,
my parents told me that they didn’t
consider me their daughter anymore.
During the study, my teacher helped
me see from the Bible that Jehovah had
a lot of really good things in store for me.
My environment was very hostile before.
My problem was
that my wife and I argued a lot,
and I had a bad temper.
The brother’s advice really helped us
to keep calm when we had problems.
When a person starts
getting to know Jehovah and they learn
and apply Bible truths in their lives,
the people who were their friends before
are going to disappear.
We need to give them
that friendship they’re losing.
We’ve had to make some sacrifices
for our students.
But when we think about the blessings,
we can barely remember the sacrifices.
I worked full-time,
but I had to adapt to the student’s needs,
not the other way around.
Sometimes I’d be up
at six o’clock in the morning
conducting a Bible study.
Sometimes things come up,
and you can’t make it.
But the study should still happen.
Another brother can study with them
if we’re not going to be there.
When someone starts studying,
it can feel like a lot.
The Bible itself has 66 books.
So for example, you can suggest
that the student start reading
a few verses every day
and then add a little more every week.
So that is how we see them progress.
You get to see them practice
what they’re learning
—really following the Bible’s counsel
in their lives.
We don’t just conduct a study,
see them progress, get baptized,
and then say, “OK, see you later.”
It doesn’t work like that.
They become part of our life.
He’s been my friend
since before I got baptized.
It’s been about 28 years now.
Years ago, my former student Abel
had a really difficult time.
His wife got sick.
Although we were far away
when we heard about it,
we kept in touch with him.
“Thank you, Livingston family,
“for calling Jessica during these hard times.
It’s very encouraging to us.”
“I know that you love us,
and we also love you very much.
“You are an example in true worship for us.
May Jehovah continue caring
for you and blessing you.”
I got baptized 34 years ago
and have been pioneering for 33 years.
My Bible teacher was Schera.
She was diagnosed with cancer.
When I got sick,
Jehovah used Mercedes to help me.
After all this time, since I helped
her learn the truth, now she comforts me.
It’s a father-son relationship.
At some point,
maybe this student will help me.
And we can say that ‘we are
good-for-nothing slaves,
and we have done
what we ought to have done.’
And they keep loving and serving Jehovah.
What’s better than that?
To expand their ministry,
many of Jehovah’s Witnesses
have learned a new language.
Have you?
Teaching someone the truth
in the language
of their heart can be rewarding.
But learning to speak and think
in a new language can also be tough.
In a recent morning worship,
Brother William Malenfant
offered some practical suggestions.
Usually,
the language that we learned
from infancy becomes
the language of the heart,
and we learn it at home.
In most cases, the dominant influence
in our life in connection
with our language of the heart,
or the first language, is our mother.
And that’s precisely what took place
in Israel in the days of Nehemiah.
But the mothers in this case were pagans
sharing their language and probably
their beliefs with their children.
And a lot of Jewish men
—prominent Jewish men—
had married pagan women.
Let’s read the scripture together
at Nehemiah 13:23, 24
—Nehemiah 13:23, 24.
It says: “In those days I also saw Jews
“who had married Ashdodite, Ammonite,
“and Moabite women.
“Half of their sons were speaking Ashdodite
“and half spoke the language
of the different peoples,
“but none of them
knew how to speak the language of the Jews.”
And as was stated,
it’s very likely that those mothers
would be teaching the children
about their land, their culture,
their worship,
and the pagan gods they worshipped.
And so the decision was made
by the Jews themselves,
when they were counseled and given direction
from Ezra and from Nehemiah,
to send those wives away
along with the children.
And that’s an interesting thing.
It must have been a bit difficult
for some husbands to see
their children sent away.
But all they knew were
the languages of the pagan wives
—nothing about Hebrew
and the worship of Jehovah God.
And the problem was
that they were sent away to keep the Jews
from losing their identity
by a gradual assimilation into the cultures
and the religions of the surrounding nations
that those wives belonged to.
In Nehemiah’s day, speaking Hebrew was vital,
and we’re grateful it’s not necessary today.
We all don’t have to learn Hebrew.
But in his wisdom, Jehovah
invites people who speak any language
to learn the “pure language,”
the truth about him and his purposes.
And, you know, it’s a bit like the opposite
of what took place at the Tower of Babel,
where Jehovah intervened and confused
the builders of the Tower of Babel,
imposing upon them different languages,
including different ways of thinking.
And so they went off disorganized
and separated from one another.
And today, we have people
from all over the world
who speak many, many different languages,
but in Jehovah’s wisdom,
he’s bringing them all together
—those who love the truth and love him—
in unity.
And this is what Zephaniah says
—Zephaniah 3:9.
It speaks of the “pure language”:
“I shall give to peoples
the change to a pure language,
in order for them all
to call upon the name of Jehovah.”
And that’s what these people do
who speak other languages.
We reach them with the truth,
but then they’re unified
with Jehovah’s organization,
because it goes on to say
“in order to serve him
shoulder to shoulder.”
So isn’t that interesting—the way Jehovah
has used the “pure language”
to bring people of many diverse backgrounds
and languages together in his worship?
In our day,
people of many different languages
are leaving their home countries
to live elsewhere.
And it’s really quite amazing
when you consider:
Large cities are filled with people
of different languages,
and even in little villages,
we find people speaking different languages.
They need help to learn the truth
in the language of their heart.
It’s interesting to note how many Bethelites
have learned other languages
in order to teach the truth to people.
In the United States Bethel, in our branch,
there are over 2,500 Bethelites
who are engaged
in 24 different language groups
and congregations.
So a lot of Bethelites (and commuters
are included in those numbers)
are doing a very fine work
in helping people
in the territory to learn the truth.
And wouldn’t it be nice— I know some of us
would love to learn some other languages
—wouldn’t it be lovely
if we could learn the way a child does?
They just absorb it
—no effort—
and they start speaking it.
A researcher, Dr. John Brierley, says this:
“‘Clearly the young brain seems
“to be programmed almost like a computer’
“for language development.
“He notes that even ‘brain anatomy’ suggests
“‘that an infant is born
with a pre-programmed
biological capacity to speak.’”
And then the comment in Awake!  said
that it’s as though the brain is hardwired
to learn language.
I’m sorry to say that as the years go by,
the hardwiring starts
to fray a bit in many of us.
But if we make the effort
and we do make a switch to a congregation
where they speak the language
that you would like to learn, remember this:
Children can be
a big help in the congregation
that you attend in a foreign language.
They can also be very startling and frank:
“You speak funny.
“Why can’t you pronounce that word properly?
It’s so easy.”
‘Well, yes, to you  it’s easy.
You were raised with it.’
But that’s how kids are.
They don’t realize the difficulties we have
as we get older,
with the grooves being so deep
and so thick in the brain
with our original language
that it’s hard to get out
of those grooves the vowels and consonants
that we’re not used
to saying in a certain order.
Keep a sense of humor; listen to the kids.
They’ll help you.
And don’t be overly concerned
about speaking a new language
without an accent.
Everybody has an accent one way or another.
Some are more agreeable than others,
but everyone has that.
And some don’t want to admit it,
but they really do.
They have an accent.
Even when we all speak the same language,
you can tell where a person is from
—whether it’s east, north, west
(whatever it may be), south.
There are accents or intonations
in the way words are pronounced.
I remember, in years gone by,
for missionaries
who were sent out into the field,
we had to follow a special program
in learning a new language.
Your first month in your new assignment,
you had to study 11 hours a day
for 30 days your new language.
Well, you felt like you were
in the Tower of Babel
on those occasions
because it was very difficult.
The second month,
you had to study your new language
four hours a day
and be out preaching 130 hours.
Your third month
was 150 hours in the field ministry,
and you’d study the language as you could.
For those who are striving
to learn a new language,
here are a few suggestions I gleaned
from the Awake!  of March 2007
and the January issue of 2000.
There are four points:
(1) motivation,
(2) humility,
(3) patience,
(4) practice.
“Motivation.
You need an incentive
—a reason to pursue your goal.”
Because if you have
a high level of motivation,
you’re going to be more successful.
Well, we have the best motivation there is:
teach people the truth;
praise our God, Jehovah;
build up the congregation
we’ve chosen to attend.
What about humility?
Well, “don’t expect too much of yourself”
when you start learning a new language.
“Mistakes are inevitable.”
And if you wait
until you can speak it perfectly
before you start making
comments or give a talk,
you may be waiting quite a while.
Be prepared, because it may not be
until after Armageddon
that you achieve that goal.
So don’t be afraid to make mistakes
and carry on with your new language.
‘Patience.
‘A brother stated: “For me,
the first two years were difficult,
‘and at times I felt like giving up.”
‘Still, he acknowledges
that it does get easier as time goes by.’
And it gets enjoyable.
And number four: “Practice.
“A regular routine will help you
to become fluent in [your] new language.
“Try to practice every day,
even if it’s for just a few minutes.
“[There’s an interesting saying]
As one textbook puts it,
“‘“A little and often”
is preferable to “a lot but seldom.”’”
So be steady,
even for short periods of time,
in practicing the new language.
Now, the fact is
that most Bethelites in our branch
are serving in the English-language field,
and they are truly a blessing
to their congregations.
The brothers are happy
to have Bethelites who take the lead,
who give of themselves, and who work hard
to build up the congregation.
So the decision to serve
in an English congregation
or with a different language group
is highly personal.
Whatever the decision may be,
there’s a key factor
that we all have to keep in mind
to maintain our spirituality at a high level
and give our Bethel assignment our best.
And that key factor
that we have to keep in mind
is to focus on the one language
that counts the most
—the “pure language” that Jehovah God
has given to his people.
As we noted earlier,
we can expect stormy tests
and trials to come our way.
But if we’ve built fire-resistant materials
in our children, our students, and ourselves
—we will stand firm.
We’ll see that in our
beautiful new music video.
The first time I heard
the word of truth
About Jehovah
and a world that is new,
Love grew in my heart
right up to this day.
But I know this world
wants to pull me away.
I cannot lose sight.
I want to do what is right.
I’ll keep building my faith
so I can be strong.
I will not give up
or give in.
His Word as my guide
I’ll follow each day.
I’ll pray to stand firm
on the ground.
I’ll keep building my faith;
I won’t stop now.
So we have to choose
where we will stand:
A life built on rock
or one built on sand.
This world around us
wants us to believe
It will stand forever,
so live and be free.
But we know the truth,
What the Kingdom will do.
Let’s keep building our faith
so we can be strong.
We will not give up
or give in.
His Word as our guide
we’ll follow each day.
We’ll pray to stand firm
on the ground.
Let’s keep building our faith;
we won’t stop now.
Let’s keep building our faith
so we can be strong.
We will not give up
or give in.
His Word as our guide
we’ll follow each day.
We’ll pray to stand firm
on the ground.
Let’s keep building our faith;
we won’t stop now.
We won’t stop now.
What an encouraging song!
And to further help you
stand firm against trials,
a new video will be released
later this month entitled
Firm Under Opposition.
This 10-minute video consists of segments
from two previous documentaries
that touched the hearts of many:
Jehovah’s Witnesses Stand Firm
Against Nazi Assault
and Faithful Under Trials
—Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Soviet Union.
So please look for this video
that combines the highlights
of the two previous programs.
It will strengthen
and help you remain faithful to Jehovah.
The theme of this month’s program was
“Let Each One Keep Watching
How He Is Building.”
We saw how first-time parents
can successfully embrace
their new responsibilities.
By setting a good example, Rudy and Nenita
helped their three daughters
reach meaningful, spiritual goals.
Louise received
fine training from her parents,
which has helped her
to enjoy a fulfilling life.
Cecilio and Schera
made sacrifices to be effective
Bible teachers, and their efforts made
a real difference
in the lives of their students.
Before we close,
let’s visit our brothers
and sisters in Nigeria.
Nigeria is
the most populous country in Africa.
Its some 200 million people
speak over 500 languages.
More than 400,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses
live and preach there.
Many publishers come
from other lands to share in the ministry.
The response to the good news
is very encouraging.
More than 870,000 Bible studies
are conducted every month.
On average, about 40 people
are baptized every day,
and seven new congregations
are formed every month.
This is the Obudu Ranch Congregation.
Their territory is beautiful,
vast, and mountainous
—literally in the clouds.
Twenty-three publishers,
including two special pioneers, serve here.
To reach areas only accessible by foot,
the publishers
sometimes walk for eight hours.
The terrain is challenging,
but the long walk
provides opportunities
for upbuilding association.
After working the territory, our brothers
stay overnight and walk back
another eight hours.
Our brothers and sisters
in the Obudu Ranch Congregation
send their warm love and greetings!
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.